CHICAGO — State lawmakers proposed new legislation on Monday that would overhaul public transportation in northeastern Illinois by merging CTA, Metra and Pace under a single agency. 

The bill, sponsored by Sen. Ram Villivalam (D-Chicago) and Rep. Eva-Dina Delgado (D-Chicago), is part of a package that also creates an additional $1.5 billion in annual transit operational funding.

“We know that our current regional transit system needs improvement to provide integrated and community-centered service,” Villivalam said at Union Station on Monday. “As fiscal pressures bear down on us, now is the time to reinvent public transit and plan for the year 2050. Not just to plug a hole.”


Union Station on Sept. 7, 2022. Credit: Colin Boyle/Block Club Chicago
The bill, backed by the Illinois Clean Jobs Coalition, essentially erases each of the independent transit agencies and establishes a regional entity called the Metropolitan Mobility Authority. That new agency would eliminate the Regional Transportation Authority, which currently oversees the three transit agencies. 


The Metropolitan Mobility Authority would be tasked with overseeing all bus, rail and paratransit operations. 

The bill comes as lawmakers, advocates and civic groups have called for a restructuring of the three agencies that are collectively facing an impending $730 million fiscal cliff beginning in 2026. Much of this budget gap is a result of a drop in farebox revenue and pandemic federal relief aid running out.

Last week, the Civic Federation joined the chorus when it released a report calling for a single agency with a new governing structure. 


Heavy fog encompasses the Metra Electric Line 51st–53rd Street station in Hyde Park on a winter day on Jan. 3, 2023. Credit: Colin Boyle/Block Club Chicago
Villivalam said the development of this bill has been years in the making, but picked up steam following recent reports from the RTA and the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning offering ideas to improve the regional transit systems.

“After those reports, it’s time to put pen to paper. It’s time to be bold in our vision for what a world-class public transit system should look like,” Villivalam said. “I think what’s most important … is to first tackle the issue of governance and tackle the issue of service.”

The Metropolitan Mobility Authority’s governing board would include 19 directors with voting power. Three are appointed by the governor, five are appointed by Chicago’s mayor and five are appointed by the Cook County Board president.

Chief executives of DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry and Will counties would each appoint one director. The chair would be appointed by the Metropolitan Mobility Authority directors. 

“Without bold action we face a 20 percent cut in funding,” Delgado said. “That would equate to a devastating 40 percent cut in transit services and that is simply untenable.” 


State Rep. Eva-Dina Delgado, center, meets with constituents at her campaign office last year. Credit: Alex V. Hernandez/Block Club Chicago
Delgado said while the current bill creates a single regional agency, there will be “subsections” within the agency focused on a particular service, such as commuter rail operations or bus services.

This merger of agencies would also complete what advocates have called on for years: universal fare integration between systems. 


“Equity starts with affordability. That means no more giant fare hikes and ending double-charging riders if they use CTA or Pace to connect to Metra or vice versa,” said Jeremy Cuebas, a transportation organizer with the Northwest Center in Belmont Cragin.

Kirk Dillard, chairman of the RTA’s board, said he welcomes any discussion on reforms that “strengthen coordination, efficiency and accountability across the regional transit system.” 

“But reforms must come with the necessary funding to upgrade service and maximize transit’s impact on the region’s economy, climate, and access to opportunity for all residents,” Dillard said in a statement. “Public transit operations in the Chicago region are chronically underfunded in comparison to our peer regions — and this lack of support predates the pandemic.”

CTA spokesperson Manny Gonzales said the agency is focused on what it believes is the root of the region’s transit challenges: “a decades-long lack of sufficient funding.”

“To attribute the region’s challenges to anything other than a funding shortage is to perpetuate a narrative that will at best serve as a distraction to the funding crisis we face,” Gonzales said. 

At worst, claiming governance and management issues are the primary challenges in the region “deepens the disparities of opportunity and access for those who are most-transit dependent – low income and minority riders and their communities,” Gonzales said.

“The current funding formula must be corrected to better serve those who are most dependent on public transit services,” Gonzales said. “Under the current formula, sales tax revenues are divided among the three Service Boards based on geographic boundaries and retail sales, not ridership, service levels and other performance-based criteria.”

This has resulted in CTA only receiving 49 percent of regional public transportation funding but providing more than 80 percent of all regional rides, Gonzales said.

“CTA knows what its riders want and deserve. It’s safe, reliable and efficient services, which we are committed to delivering every day,” Gonzales said. “However, due to decades of insufficient operating funding support, CTA has been and continues operating at a deficit, which clearly has had a disparate impact on our riders, the majority of which identify as ethnic or racial minority.”

Kate Lowe, associate professor of urban planning and policy at the University of Illinois Chicago, said the proposed consolidation of the agencies in the bill is promising more than what it can actually deliver.

Lowe believes the rampant distrust of the CTA may be fueling the interest to “dissolve” the agency, but there could be “inadvertent consequences for the city’s influence in the lifeblood of our city — CTA ‘L’ and bus service.”

“Underfunding of public services is the core issue facing our agencies, coupled with the CTA labor crisis,” Lowe said. 